Update DA light client docs (#1818)
near/docs: docs/data-availability/light-client.md

title: Light Client
---

# NEAR light client

A trustless off-chain light client for NEAR with DA-enabled features, such as KZG commitments, Reed-Solomon erasure coding & storage connectors.

:::note
The NEAR Light client was inspired by the [Helios light client](https://github.com/a16z/helios), where there were once many light client implementations for Ethereum until it was released. 

> :::

Reviewer: I'd say we probably don't need this in the docs, we can keep it in the README.

Author: 👍 removed

> :::note
> The NEAR Light client was inspired by the [Helios light client](https://github.com/a16z/helios), where there were once many light client implementations for Ethereum until it was released. 
> :::

Author: ```suggestion
```

### ZK client

It's a fully featured light client protocol, providing sync and transaction verification. It exploits STARK acceleration for the STARK-friendly functionality and parallel proving for the Merkle verification.
We aim to also fold verification and syncing with proof recursion so the light client can act lazily, syncing when needed, vs syncing eagerly. 

:::tip

Check out the ZK light client on the [Succinct network here](https://alpha.succinct.xyz/near/near-light-client).

:::

The initial implementation of the ZK light client protocol can be [found here](https://github.com/near/near-light-client/tree/master/nearx). It leverages [Succinct's prover network](https://alpha.succinct.xyz/) and [plonky2x SDK](https://github.com/succinctlabs/succinctx) as a proving system.
This will allow developers to pay for proof generation from the proof market.

#### Circuits

Below are the current circuits for the ZK light client.

:::note
The current circuits serve only a "one-shot" command style for syncing/verification and no autonomous proving.
:::

> Since the ZK client integrates with a Solidity Contract on chain and the circuit must have a statically aligned size, we have to minimise as much calldata as possible, opting to witness verification in the circuit rather than store information.

Author: ```suggestion
Since the ZK client integrates with a Solidity Contract on chain and the circuit must have a statically aligned size, we have to minimize as much call data as possible, opting to witness verification in the circuit rather than store information.
```

> Since the ZK client integrates with a Solidity Contract on chain and the circuit must have a statically aligned size, we have to minimise as much calldata as possible, opting to witness verification in the circuit rather than store information.

Author: ```suggestion
Since the ZK client integrates with a Solidity Contract on chain and the circuit must have a statically aligned size, we have to minimize as much call data as possible, opting to witness verification in the circuit rather than store information.
```
